so now let's let's go back to this
figure again over here so if you look at
my processor you know I have my core
over here that I have an l1 cache I have
a larger l2 cache and so on so you know
let's say that I have a Miss on all of
these caches and I ultimately need to
get my data from physical memory okay so
now you know having the virtual address
so you know the core issues are
requesting a load load something in and
it's always going to refer to the
virtual address okay because the
application and the binary always deal
with just virtual addresses because that
is all that is visible to that right
we're giving them the illusion that they
have access to this contiguous eight
gigabytes of space the application has
no idea that these these virtual
addresses that are being issued
ultimately translate into in a virtual
page numbers which get mapped to some
arbitrary physical page number right
this is obviously not known at compile
time so the application is issuing these
virtual addresses at runtime these
virtual pages are being mapped to some
arbitrary physical page okay so if I do
need to get the data from the physical
main memory I have to translate this
virtual address to a physical address
okay and that translation is being done
through this page table that I mentioned
okay and these page tables themselves
are fairly large structures right it has
a million entries and there could be say
20 programs running together so you have
in a 20 million entries each entry needs
a few bytes of data and so if you are
talking about capacities that cannot fit
in the l2 cache right or on the l3 cache
so these page tables are large enough
that they have to be stored in memory
somewhere ok so let's say that there's a
region of memory that is being used and
managed by the operating system
to store all the page table entries ok
so in order to translate the virtual
address to physical address I first need
to read the page table once I have the
page table I know that you know virtual
address ABC is being translated to
physical address PQR ok now I can
actually issue my request to physical
page PQR get the data and now the
application finally has the data that it
needs right so just to get you know one
block of data from memory I actually
need to issue two different
to memory want to get the page table
translation and want to get the data
itself okay so this is you know clearly
very very expensive okay and so to avoid
this high-cost
what is done is that a portion of the
page table is stored on the processor in
a structure called the TLB okay so let
me just blow up the structure over here
so this is called the TLB which is a
translation lookaside buffer which is a
bit of a fairly complicated name for
something that can also be called a page
table cache okay so instead of keeping
so you know since the page table has a
million entries it is hard to keep all
of it on chip so only a small portion is
being kept in this TLB structure so the
TLB could be you know let's say as
little as 64 entries and you know what
entry over here for example say is that
for process ID 7 virtual page number ABC
maps to a physical page number PQR okay
so if this is a page ABC that is that
has been touched recently then that that
translation is being cashed in the ste
lb structure and so instead of having to
go to memory to look up the page table
you can just look up the small structure
which you know perhaps takes a single
cycle to access and you can say well you
know virtual page number ABC translates
to physical page number PQR right there
I have the physical address that I'm
dealing with so with the single memory
access I can now get my data
okay so TLB has a certain coverage that
is if it has 64 entries and each entry
can deal with an 8 kilobyte page at a
time you're essentially keeping track of
translations for 512 kilobytes worth of
memory space right so you can handle a
working set size of 512 kilobytes
without ever having a miss in the TLB if
you have a mess in the TLB then again
you do have to access memory to get the
page table translation okay but you know
if you're just dealing with this let's
say 512 kilobytes worth of data the hope
is that you will that you will always
have a TLB hit and you won't have to do
multiple memory accesses to get to get
your your data elements
okay so if you want to increase your TLB
coverage one option is to increase the
page size if you went from an 8 kilobyte
page size to a 16 kilobyte page size
then your TLB coverage would also grow
to 1 megabyte in size okay but then the
laws of the page size the more memory
space that also gets wasted so the
operating system has to take these into
account when it defines the page size
okay and you know later we'll also talk
about a concept of super pages which
allows you to dynamically create larger
page sizes okay so let me just do a
quick recap before I end this video so
as I said you know your application is
producing virtual addresses and you know
not a each application need not use its
entire 8 gigabytes worth of virtual
space right you're usually using a
smaller fraction of that so if every
application that is currently running is
using a small fraction of its entire a
gigabytes of virtual memory space it's
possible that all of that memory fits in
physical memory ok so you may not use
your swap space on disk if if your
memory requirement is very small now as
the memory requirement grows you will
end up needing more pages and you may
end up spilling some pages into the swap
space ok so every virtual address gets
translated into a physical address ok
and that translation is kept track off
in the page table and some page table
entries are being kept in the TLB okay
the you know we are managing the
physical memory space has a fully
associative cache so your page could be
placed anywhere in physical memory and
the replacement policy is usually at
least recently used and the memory disk
hierarchy can you know is usually
exclusive and the write policy is almost
always right back because of the high
cost of doing any disk access ok as I
said the TLB is a small fraction of your
page table entries and it prevents
having to do in a too expensive memory
lookups to get one word of data and by
using a large page size you can also
increase the coverage of the TLB ok so
in the next video I'll show you how the
TLB and the cache how those two
structures interact
to each other